[Search] Add ESQL version of full-text search + filtering tutorial (#809)
elastic/docs-content: solutions/search/esql-full-text-filter-tutorial.md

## Step 5: Filter and find exact matches

Filtering allows you to narrow down your search results based on exact criteria. Unlike full-text searches, filters are binary (yes/no) and do not affect the relevance score. Filters execute faster than queries because excluded results don't need to be scored.

```esql
POST /_query?format=txt
{
  "query": """
    FROM cooking_blog
    | WHERE category.keyword == "Breakfast"
    | KEEP title, author, rating, tags
    | SORT rating DESC
    | LIMIT 1000
  """
}
```

Note the use of `category.keyword` here. This refers to the [`keyword`](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/keyword.md) multi-field of the `category` field, ensuring an exact, case-sensitive match.

### Search for posts within a date range

Often users want to find content published within a specific time frame:

```esql
POST /_query?format=txt
{
  "query": """
    FROM cooking_blog
    | WHERE date >= "2023-05-01" AND date <= "2023-05-31"
    | KEEP title, author, date, rating
    | LIMIT 1000
  """
}
```

### Find exact matches

> Sometimes users want to search for exact terms to eliminate ambiguity in their search results:

Author: Not sure how we achieve this in ESQL because match uses analysis obs

Author: ```sql
POST /_query?format=txt
{
  "query": """
    FROM cooking_blog
    | WHERE tags.keyword == "vegetarian"
    | KEEP title, author, rating, tags
    | LIMIT 1000
  """
}
```

Fails with 
`#! Line 3:13: evaluation of [tags.keyword == "vegetarian"] failed, treating result as null. Only first 20 failures recorded.`

Author: https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/809/commits/b76bb8b54d87e4fb35ee339bb007ba986e6a0365

```esql
POST /_query?format=txt
{
  "query": """
    FROM cooking_blog
    | WHERE tags.keyword:"vegetarian"
    | KEEP title, author, rating, tags
    | LIMIT 1000
  """
}
```

Like the `term` query in Query DSL, this has zero flexibility and is case-sensitive.

## Step 6: Combine multiple search criteria

Complex searches often require combining multiple search criteria:

```esql
POST /_query?format=txt
{
  "query": """
    FROM cooking_blog METADATA _score
    | WHERE rating >= 4.5
      AND NOT category.keyword == "Dessert"
      AND (title:"curry spicy" OR description:"curry spicy")
    | SORT _score DESC
    | KEEP title, author, rating, tags, description
    | LIMIT 1000
  """
}
```

For more complex relevance scoring with combined criteria, you can use the `EVAL` command to calculate custom scores:

```esql

> POST /_query?format=txt

Author: WIP this is incorrect

---
navigation_title: "Search and filter with ES|QL"
---

# Tutorial: Full-text search and filtering with {{esql}}

:::{tip}
This tutorial presents examples in {{esql}} syntax. Refer to [the Query DSL version](querydsl-full-text-filter-tutorial.md) for the equivalent examples in Query DSL syntax.
:::

> This is a hands-on introduction to the basics of [full-text search](full-text.md) with Elasticsearch, also known as *lexical search*, and how to filter search results based on exact criteria. In this scenario, we're implementing a search function for a cooking blog. The blog contains recipes with various attributes including textual content, categorical data, and numerical ratings.

Reviewer: Here we focus primarily on lexical search. where do you think we should add a note on semantic search with `match`? If possible I would add a section on semantic search in this guide - can also be done as a follow up.

Author: https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/809/commits/6249e4a46c61b39667ed8b227fec7d232e6fd382

{"title":"Vegan Chocolate Avocado Mousse","description":"Discover the magic of avocado in this rich, vegan chocolate mousse. Creamy, indulgent, and secretly healthy, it's the perfect guilt-free dessert for chocolate lovers.","author":"Alex Green","date":"2023-05-15","category":"Dessert","tags":["vegan","chocolate","avocado","healthy dessert"],"rating":4.5}
{"index":{"_id":"5"}}
{"title":"Crispy Oven-Fried Chicken","description":"Get that perfect crunch without the deep fryer! This oven-fried chicken recipe delivers crispy, juicy results every time. A healthier take on the classic comfort food.","author":"Maria Rodriguez","date":"2023-05-20","category":"Main Course","tags":["chicken","oven-fried","healthy"],"rating":4.9}
```

## Step 3: Perform basic full-text searches

Full-text search involves executing text-based queries across one or more document fields. These queries calculate a relevance score for each matching document, based on how closely the document's content aligns with the search terms. Elasticsearch offers various query types, each with its own method for matching text and relevance scoring.

:::{tip}
ES|QL provides two ways to perform full-text searches:

> 1. Full match function syntax: `match(field, "search terms")`

Author: Just for context, the goal of this PR is to update an existing tutorial to show ESQL options, but I think we can add on a bonus section to say "hey semantic search is also available here". When drafting the original Query DSL version of this tutorial, we left out query string and fuzzy/wildcards because it seemed to be TMI in one tutorial.

Perhaps KQL and QSTR are best documented in the dedicated ESQL for Search landing page initially?

> Maybe having some kind of table with features?

This definitely should be in the dedicated search page, rather than an example tutorial

We should of course link to that dedicated page from this tutorial for visibility 👍

1. Compact syntax using the match operator "`:`": `field:"search terms"`

Both are equivalent and can be used interchangeably. The compact syntax is more concise, while the function syntax allows for more configuration options. We'll use the compact syntax in most examples for brevity.
:::

### Basic full-text query

Here's how to search the `description` field for "fluffy pancakes":

```esql
POST /_query?format=txt
{
  "query": """
    FROM cooking_blog
    | WHERE description:"fluffy pancakes"

>     | LIMIT 1000

Author: Yeah it's a choice of whether we prefer to pollute the queries or the responses, I don't have a strong opinion

>     | LIMIT 1000

Reviewer 2: I do think queries should be as lightweight as possible. LIMIT 1000 is present on _every_ ESQL example. It's redundant, unnecessary, and distracting. But it's not for this PR to fix 😉

}
```

This query searches the title field to match at least 2 of the 3 terms: "fluffy", "pancakes", or "breakfast".

## Step 4: Search across multiple fields at once

When users enter a search query, they often don't know (or care) whether their search terms appear in a specific field. ES|QL provides ways to search across multiple fields simultaneously:

```esql
POST /_query?format=txt
{
  "query": """
    FROM cooking_blog
    | WHERE title:"vegetarian curry" OR description:"vegetarian curry" OR tags:"vegetarian curry"
    | LIMIT 1000
  """
}
```

This query searches for "vegetarian curry" across the title, description, and tags fields. Each field is treated with equal importance.

However, in many cases, matches in certain fields (like the title) might be more relevant than others. We can adjust the importance of each field using scoring:

```esql
POST /_query?format=txt
{
  "query": """
    FROM cooking_blog METADATA _score
    | WHERE match(title, "vegetarian curry", {"boost": 2.0}) 
        OR match(description, "vegetarian curry") 
        OR match(tags, "vegetarian curry")
    | KEEP title, description, tags, _score
    | SORT _score DESC
    | LIMIT 1000
  """
}
```

> In this example, we're using the `boost` parameter to make matches in the title field twice as important as matches in other fields. We also request the `_score` metadata field to sort results by relevance.

Reviewer 2: I think it's important to clarify how _score works:

- No score? You're filtering, not caring about relevance
- Scoring? Then, take into account:
  - Full text functions affect scoring
  - Other things don't (this is not true for 8.18 as there, other things provide a constant score, but will be true in 8.19 / 9.x)
  - You need to sort by _score as mentioned in the example

Author: Cool I'll add a tip about this, and we should go into detail on the metadata `_score` entry eventually in https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/esql-metadata-fields.html

@carlosdelest let me know if I can help out on that too :)

Author: Done!

Author: @carlosdelest this PR is targeting 9.0 docs. does this caveat about "other things provide a constant score" still true in 9.0?

Author: See https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/809/commits/22b1ad171b3a8b126218e2e74507b64796e9f316

Reviewer 2: Oh, you're right - 9.x will have that fixed. Sorry for the noise 😢

Author: cool no worries thanks for clearing that up, I can make this simpler so 👍

```

For more complex relevance scoring with combined criteria, you can use the `EVAL` command to calculate custom scores:

```esql
POST /_query?format=txt
{
  "query": """
    FROM cooking_blog METADATA _score
    | WHERE tags.keyword == "vegetarian" AND rating >= 4.5
    | EVAL title_score = SCORE(match(title, "curry spicy")) * 2
    | EVAL desc_score = SCORE(match(description, "curry spicy"))
    | EVAL combined_score = title_score + desc_score
    | EVAL category_boost = IF(category.keyword == "Main Course", 1.0, 0.0)
    | EVAL date_boost = IF(date >= "now-1M/d", 0.5, 0.0)
    | EVAL final_score = combined_score + category_boost + date_boost
    | WHERE NOT category.keyword == "Dessert"
    | WHERE final_score > 0
    | SORT final_score DESC
    | LIMIT 1000
  """
}
```

This ES|QL query uses an explicit scoring mechanism:
1. Requires "vegetarian" tag and rating >= 4.5
2. Computes separate scores for `title` and `description` matches
3. Adds boosts for Main Course category and recent dates
4. Excludes Desserts
5. Sorts by the final combined score

:::{warning}
TODO

This section shouldn't live in a tutorial, leaving it here for comments/suggestions if it might be useful
:::

> ## Optimizing your ES|QL queries

Reviewer 2: ++

```esql
FROM cooking_blog
| WHERE title:"vegetarian curry" OR description:"vegetarian curry" OR tags:"vegetarian curry"
| LIMIT 1000
```

This query searches for "vegetarian curry" across the title, description, and tags fields. Each field is treated with equal importance.

However, in many cases, matches in certain fields (like the title) might be more relevant than others. We can adjust the importance of each field using scoring:

```esql
FROM cooking_blog METADATA _score  # Request _score metadata for relevance-based results
| WHERE match(title, "vegetarian curry", {"boost": 2.0})  # Title matches are twice as important
    OR match(description, "vegetarian curry")
    OR match(tags, "vegetarian curry")
| KEEP title, description, tags, _score  # Include relevance score in results
| SORT _score DESC  # You must explicitly sort by `_score` to see relevance-based results
| LIMIT 1000
```

:::{tip}
When working with relevance scoring in ES|QL, it's important to understand how `_score` works. If you don't include `METADATA _score` in your query, you're only performing filtering operations with no relevance calculation.

> When you include `METADATA _score`, only search functions contribute to the relevance score. Filtering operations (like range conditions and exact matches) don't affect the score.

Reviewer 2: Not sure if this is more clear 🤔 - up to you to decide!

```suggestion
When you include `METADATA _score`, search functions included in WHERE conditions contribute to the relevance score. Filtering operations (like range conditions and exact matches) don't affect the score.
```

Complex searches often require combining multiple search criteria:

```esql
FROM cooking_blog METADATA _score
| WHERE rating >= 4.5  # Numerical filter
    AND NOT category.keyword == "Dessert"  # Exclusion filter
    AND (title:"curry spicy" OR description:"curry spicy")  # Full-text search in multiple fields
| SORT _score DESC
| KEEP title, author, rating, tags, description
| LIMIT 1000
```

### Combine relevance scoring with custom criteria

For more complex relevance scoring with combined criteria, you can use the `EVAL` command to calculate custom scores:

```esql
FROM cooking_blog METADATA _score
| EVAL tags_concat = MV_CONCAT(tags.keyword, ",")  # Convert multi-value field to string
| WHERE tags_concat LIKE "*vegetarian*" AND rating >= 4.5  # Wildcard pattern matching

> | WHERE match(title, "curry spicy", {"boost": 2.0}) OR match(description, "curry spicy")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| WHERE match(title, "curry spicy", {"boost": 2.0}) OR match(description, "curry spicy") # Uses full text functions, will update _score metadata field
```

| EVAL category_boost = CASE(category.keyword == "Main Course", 1.0, 0.0)  # Conditional boost
| EVAL date_boost = CASE(DATE_DIFF("month", date, NOW()) <= 1, 0.5, 0.0)  # Boost recent content
| EVAL custom_score = _score + category_boost + date_boost  # Combine scores

> | WHERE NOT category.keyword == "Dessert"

Reviewer 2: Do you think we should move this closer to FROM, so it doesn't interfere with score calculation but is part of the filtering part?
